\chapter{Audio}
\section{ZX Spectrum 1-bit}

The baseline sound of the ZX Spectrum was produced by toggling the Ear
bit (bit 4) of \$fe (254) The ULA port to produce 1-bit audio.  It is
enabled by bit 4 of Next register \$08 (8).  While this does work on
the ZX Spectrum Next, there are other much better methods and this is
only supported for backward compatibility.

Code:
\lstinputlisting{audio/speaker.asm}

\section{Sampled 8-bit}

The ZX Next has four 8-bit D/A audio channels connected to provide
sampled stereo sound. Channels A and B are the left channels, while C
and D are the right channels. In order use 8-bit sound, it must first
be enabled by setting bit 3 on nextreg \$08. In order to emulate
legacy hardware there are a number of ports that can be used to
control the four channels additionally these are mirrored to three
nextregs to enable driving audio using the copper.  Channel A is
mapped to ports \$0f, \$3f, and \$f1; channel B to ports \$1f and \$f3
and nextreg \$2C; channel C to ports \$4f, and \$f9 and nextreg \$2E;
and channel D to: \$5f and \$fb; with port \$df connected to both
channel A and C and nextreg \$2D connected to both channel A and D.

Code:
\lstinputlisting{audio/convox.asm}

\section{Turbosound}

TurboSound consists of the implementation of three AY-3-8912 chips. To
enable TurboSound set bit 1 of Next Register \$08 (8). Once enabled
the sound chips and registers of the sound chips are selected using
port \$fffd (65533) TurboSound Next Control while the registers are
accessed using \$bffd () Sound Chip Register Access.  To enable access
to a particular chip write 111111xx to the control register where
01=AY1, 10=AY2, and 11=AY3.  Access to particular registers of the
selected chip is selected by writing the register number to the
control register. You can then access a chip register using the access
port.

Code:
\lstinputlisting{audio/turbo.asm}

Each of the three AY chips has three channels, A, B, and C whose
mapping is controlled by bit 5 of Next register 0x08 (8).

\input{registers/ay/00.tex}
\input{registers/ay/01.tex}
\input{registers/ay/02.tex}
\input{registers/ay/03.tex}
\input{registers/ay/04.tex}
\input{registers/ay/05.tex}
\input{registers/ay/06.tex}
\input{registers/ay/07.tex}
\input{registers/ay/08.tex}
\input{registers/ay/09.tex}
\input{registers/ay/0A.tex}
\input{registers/ay/0B.tex}
\input{registers/ay/0C.tex}
\input{registers/ay/0D.tex}

\subsection{Pi Audio}
If connected the Pi Zero is configured to use the ZX Next as a
soundcard over an \iis interface making the Raspberry Pi a fully
configurable audio source for the ZX Spectrum Next.
